Table row id spec (#937)
ni/nimble: packages/nimble-components/src/table/specs/README.md

    -   Define how the action menu gets associated with a particular column
    -   Define the table-level(column-level?) API(s) for applying an action menu to the table (slot, properties, etc...)

_Attributes_

> -   `id-field-name` - An optional string attribute that specifies the field name within a row's record to use as a row's ID. If the attribute is not defined or a field with the specified name does not exist in a row's record, a default ID will be created. The default ID is the index of the row's record within the table's `data` property. The value associated with the field name must be unique across all records in the table's data.

Reviewer: Half formed thought as I leave for the day, feel free to request clarification or defer for later discussion...

Since you mentioned that row IDs are required to build context menus, I'll mention a couple corner cases to consider in case they affect how we want to handle/generate IDs:
1. when the "grouping" feature is enabled, opening an action menu on a "group" row that the table created as a parent of data rows
2. multiselecting rows then opening a context menu

Both of these might be moot if we don't plan to support multi-edit operations via context menus. But if they are supported then we might need to think about APIs that support an array of IDs and/or a way to generate IDs for rows that were created by the table rather than the `data` records.

Author: 1. At least today, we don't have action menus on a "group" row. If that changes, we'll have to come up with an appropriate way to convey that information to the client. I think we could defer this until the requirement for having group context menus arises.
2. In the SLE grid today, opening the menu will cause only a single row to be selected. I could see that changing in the future, so I was already thinking about proposing that the event that is fired when the menu is opening might contain an array of row IDs. I think we can defer this for the spec about the context menu (likely later this week) when we flesh out exactly what the event details & name will be.

Reviewer: Sounds good, thanks for thinking about it.

> -   `id-field-name` - An optional string attribute that specifies the field name within a row's record to use as a row's ID. If the attribute is not defined or a field with the specified name does not exist in a row's record, a default ID will be created. The default ID is the index of the row's record within the table's `data` property. The value associated with the field name must be unique across all records in the table's data.

Reviewer: What would happen if the values of the field are not unique across rows? I guess we could document that they must be unique, but if clients don't obey that, would the table generate a useful error or would we end up with weird behaviors?

Author: These are similar to questions asked below, so I am consolidating the discussion.

https://github.com/ni/nimble/pull/937#discussion_r1061055541

> -   `id-field-name` - An optional string attribute that specifies the field name within a row's record to use as a row's ID. If the attribute is not defined or a field with the specified name does not exist in a row's record, a default ID will be created. The default ID is the index of the row's record within the table's `data` property. The value associated with the field name must be unique across all records in the table's data.

Reviewer 2: Is it too early to define that the [CellState](https://github.com/ni/nimble/blob/bec417c55304b1cb23de95af2a8e8e35c6658019/packages/nimble-components/src/table/specs/table-columns-hld.md#tablecellstate-interface) will include the id / calculatedId / resolvedId?

Seems like it would be useful to also communicate with the cell what the id mode is. So if a button in a cell template fires an event it can include `detail: {resolvedId: 7, idMode: 'index'}` vs `detail: {resolvedId: 'user-defined-id-8', idMode: 'field'}` or something.

Author: I've updated `table-columns-hld.md` to include `rowId: string` in the `TableCellState` interface. I don't think we'll have a concept of ID modes though.

> -   `id-field-name` - An optional string attribute that specifies the field name within a row's record to use as a row's ID. If the attribute is not defined or a field with the specified name does not exist in a row's record, a default ID will be created. The default ID is the index of the row's record within the table's `data` property. The value associated with the field name must be unique across all records in the table's data.

Reviewer 2: > The default ID is the index of the row's record within the table's `data` property. The value associated with the field name must be unique across all records in the table's data.

Will there be any assertions for these? What if one record is missing the id but the rest have it? What if an id is not unique? Does tanstack give us any defined behavior there? (sounds like we should have tests too)

Author: These are similar questions to what @jattasNI asked in a comment above. Let's consolidate the discussion to this thread.

The current behavior we get for free from TanStack is this:
- There are no assertions for uniqueness within TanStack. You'd just have multiple rows with the same ID, which could cause indeterministic behavior when applying state (like row selection) or when firing an event to tell the user what row an action occurred on. There is a function in TanStack called `getRow(id: string): Row`, which would only return one row even if more than one with a given ID was found -- from the code I've seen, I think it would always return the last row in the table with the given ID.
- There is a hook in TanStack to implement `getRowId(row: TData, index: number, parent?: Row<TData>): string` to return whatever ID we want. If we don't implement that function, or if our implementation of that function returns a falsey value, then the default index-based ID will be used by TanStack.
- We aren't in control of when `getRowId()` is called, so the options I can see for providing our own assertions about the ID being present & unique are:
    1. Check every time the data is set that our `getRowId()` function will return a unique value for every record. This means that `getRowId()` would be called twice every time the data is updated, but maybe that isn't too bad since it should be a very light-weight function.
    2. Override `getCoreRowModel` from TanStack. This is the function that calls `getRowId()` and builds a cache of Rows and a map from id to Row. It would be easy to add a check here that the ID was unique, but I don't like the idea of maintaining our own copy of the implementation of `getCoreRowModel`. While it isn't too complex, it's large enough that I'd rather not duplicate it.
    3. Try to upstream a change to TanStack that performs the assertion within their implementation of `getCoreRowModel`.

Given those options, I'd lean towards option 1, but I'd be interested in hearing other opinions or ideas.

Reviewer: iv. Don't do any automatic validation in production code. We could provide a helper function to do validation and clients could decide when to call it. We could recommend that they call it in tests after setting the data and maybe also in local dev builds. (A variation of this would be to have strict validation be a mode of the table rather than a function to be called, but still recommend only enabling strict validation in non-production scenarios.

Something like this is where I'm leaning initially (despite being one of the people to ask about automating assertions 😛) since I don't think it will be common to accidentally generate non-unique IDs so I'm wary of adding runtime cost to assert it.

Reviewer 3: I also lean (_hard_) towards Jesse's "iv" option, particularly with having the strict validation be a mode on the table. Note that I also think this could be done as follow-on work to introducing the attribute on the table.

Reviewer 2: I'd kinda lean the other way. Be strict by default and give the option to loosen up / shoot yourself in the foot (maybe an attribute like `skip-load-validation` or something if we find it is needed).

Since the validation will only happen on data updates and not interactions / scrolling, I think it's not going to generally be a problem (particularly for our target size of ~10K elements). We did similar order expensive things on grid data load in WebVIs (full data copy >.<) and found the perf to be pretty good.

Author: I personally don't think that many (or maybe any) clients would call a helper function to do validation. At least in SLE, tests are all using fake data, so that validation doesn't help much within tests -- other than potentially telling them that their mock data is invalid.

Therefore, I think we should either always do validation or never do validation. I personally don't think we'll find that the validation step is that expensive because all we're really doing is accessing a single property within each data item, and this would always be done when we're about to create a whole new collection of TanStack Row models for each data item (which is a significantly more expensive operation).

Reviewer: I love that our initial perspectives cover pretty much the entire spectrum! Let's talk about it at/after standup today to reach consensus.

Author: I've updated the spec as follows:
- we'll always do validation
- if validation fails, no rows will be rendered in the table
- the table will report that it is invalid through a `validity` property and a `checkValidity()` function

> -   `id-field-name` - An optional string attribute that specifies the field name within a row's record to use as a row's ID. If the attribute is not defined or a field with the specified name does not exist in a row's record, a default ID will be created. The default ID is the index of the row's record within the table's `data` property. The value associated with the field name must be unique across all records in the table's data.

Reviewer 2: Should we do api defaults magic and have the default resolved value be `id` for an undefined `id-field-name`?

- If the attribute is not defined:
  - If all (or first?) records have a field named id, then the field `id` is used and the id mode is 'field'
  - if the records do not have a field named id, then the id mode is 'index'
- If the attribute is defined:
  - If all (or first?) records have a field with the value of id-field-name, then that value is used and id mode is 'field'
  - if the records do not have a field name with value of id-field-name, then the id mode is 'index' (or we throw an error since this is just a bad configuration...)

What's a bummer about the above is what if you have a field named `id` but don't want it to be used (you know the id isn't unique, etc, and want to be in index mode). You can't really express that cleanly (maybe choose a random field name and hope it won't accidentally exist).

I'm on the fence about making the config more magical.

Author: I think I'd prefer it to be explicit. Setting the `id-field-name` to `id` isn't difficult or verbose, so I'd rather not try to do anything too fancy in an effort to keep a client from having to set that attribute.

> -   `id-field-name` - An optional string attribute that specifies the field name within a row's record to use as a row's ID. If the attribute is not defined or a field with the specified name does not exist in a row's record, a default ID will be created. The default ID is the index of the row's record within the table's `data` property. The value associated with the field name must be unique across all records in the table's data.

Reviewer 2: Given the complexity of this attribute, I think we should have a readonly property (not attribute) that is an enum of the resolved id mode, maybe `idMode='field' | 'index'` or something. Seems like it would be useful for debugging.

Author: Sure, I can add that. Are you envisioning the logic being something as simple as:
```ts
this.idMode = this.idFieldName ? 'field' : 'index';
```

Or, are you picturing different logic?

Reviewer 2: From the description it sounds like there is more to the logic

> If the attribute is not defined or a field with the specified name does not exist in a row's record, a default ID will be created.

```ts
this.idMode = isInRecords(this.idFieldName) ? 'field' : 'index';
```

Author: Maybe I was misunderstanding some of the other feedback, but it sounded to me like part of the validation logic we wanted to add was to verify that the field name was valid for the records. Therefore, I was thinking we wouldn't have a valid case where the field wasn't in the records.

Reviewer 2: Yea if we do strict validation that makes sense. Maybe we need an 'error' case?

```ts
const table = document.createElement('nimble-table');
table.idFieldName= 'test';
table.data = // some invalid value with wrong id. Is the assignment ignored altogether (keep default / old value)? I think... maybe.. we take the data but don't render the table with it. The user could run these assignments in different orders, ie. assign data then idFieldName vs idFoeldName then table
console.log(table.idMode) // 'error' ?
```

```ts
const table = document.createElement('nimble-table');
table.idFieldName= 'test';
table.data = // assign some good data, [{test: 1, other: 'hello'}, {test: 2, other: 'world'}]
console.log(table.idMode) // field
table.idFieldName= 'bob';
console.log(table.idMode) // with strict validation I guess this would now be 'error'?
```

Author: The question in my mind is what happens when the validation detects an issue? Does it throw an exception, throw out the data and not apply it to the table, something else? I ask because I would think the purpose of validation is keeping someone from getting into a case that is invalid.

I'm also having trouble understanding the purpose of this property -- maybe because of the questions I just posed. It seems to me that a client would know how they've configured the table (either to use field-based IDs or default IDs), so I'm not sure how this property would actually be used (other than perhaps by our own unit tests).

Reviewer 2: > I'm also having trouble understanding the purpose of this property 

The initial spec text where this property was suggested included conditional logic to resolve the expected behavior before we discussed strict validation. In the initial text the table silently ignored an invalid idFieldName and switched to index mode internally without telling the user.

The property was to make that hidden choice available to users to understand the state of the table. Primarily for user debugging. Depending on the direction we go with strict validation it may not be necessary. My end goal is that if the table is ignoring behaviors / making choices, that the user can observe the resolved state of the table's choices.

> The question in my mind is what happens when the validation detects an issue? Does it throw an exception, throw out the data and not apply it to the table, something else?

Yep that is the question. If setting the data was done by a method then throwing an exception makes sense. When setting the data by a property I don't think that is as good an idea to throw an error from the accessor...

One concern I have with throwing an exception is how do the two properties relate. The problem is one effects the other and potentially invalidates the other. We should not enforce an order requirement in the assignment.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can take a page out of the HTML 5 form validation api and have a [validity state](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ValidityState/badInput) object?

```ts
const table = document.createElement('nimble-table');
table.checkValidity() // true, empty data is valid data
table.data = [{a:0},{a:1}]
table.checkValidity() // true
table.data = [{a:0},{a:1, id: 1}]
table.checkValidity() // true
table.idFieldName = 'invalid';
table.checkValidity() // false
table.validity.invalidIdField === true;
table.idFieldName = 'id';
table.checkValidity() // false
table.validity.recordsMissingIdField === true;
```

The assumpton being that we take the properties assigned, don't reject or throw. And if the properties are invalid we ignore them / use the default of an empty table.

This pattern will probably be useful for column configuration as well, i.e. the field name for a column configuration is not in the data, etc.
```

Author: I've updated the spec as follows:
- we'll always do validation
- if validation fails, no rows will be rendered in the table
- the table will report that it is invalid through a `validity` property and a `checkValidity()` function

Given this, I don't think we need an `idMode` property since a table with valid configuration will always use the field specified by `id-field-name`, unless that attribute is undefined.

    -   Define how the action menu gets associated with a particular column
    -   Define the table-level(column-level?) API(s) for applying an action menu to the table (slot, properties, etc...)

_Attributes_

> -   `id-field-name` - An optional string attribute that specifies the field name within a row's record to use as a row's ID. If the attribute is not specified, a default ID will be generated. If the attribute is invalid, no rows in the table will be rendered, and the table will enter an invalid state according to the `validity` property and `checkValidity()` function. The attribute is invalid in the following conditions:

Reviewer 2: I think not rendering for an invalid state makes sense. After sleeping on it I don't like the idea of "saving the last render", that means you can end up in states where two tables have the exact same property values assigned and show different results. Seems sketchy. Elements should be as declarative as possible.

If we revise the not rendering decision in the future I'd advocate for partial / incomplete / fallback rendering of some sort instead of saving the last render. If the id field is invalid, set the validity error on the table but go ahead and render using index mode instead. That direction opened up cans of worms but I'd rather go the "do something with the properties you have" direction than the "show the last render" direction.

Just a brain dump / thought, I dunno if there is anything to capture. Maybe we can have an open question about the behavior for invalid states and capture some note there.

Author: I've added some notes in the `Open Issues` section.

> -   `id-field-name` - An optional string attribute that specifies the field name within a row's record to use as a row's ID. If the attribute is not specified, a default ID will be generated. If the attribute is invalid, no rows in the table will be rendered, and the table will enter an invalid state according to the `validity` property and `checkValidity()` function. The attribute is invalid in the following conditions:

Reviewer 2: Good thought that since the generated id does expose itself in the public api (events, selected ids, etc) we should have control over it. Maybe we should capture some notes in open issues about that?

> -   `id-field-name` - An optional string attribute that specifies the field name within a row's record to use as a row's ID. If the attribute is not specified, a default ID will be generated. If the attribute is invalid, no rows in the table will be rendered, and the table will enter an invalid state according to the `validity` property and `checkValidity()` function. The attribute is invalid in the following conditions:

Author: I'll be sure to add a test for this.

> -   `id-field-name` - An optional string attribute that specifies the field name within a row's record to use as a row's ID. If the attribute is not specified, a default ID will be generated. If the attribute is invalid, no rows in the table will be rendered, and the table will enter an invalid state according to the `validity` property and `checkValidity()` function. The attribute is invalid in the following conditions:

Author: I've added a note in the `Open Issues` section.

    -   Multiple records were found with the same ID
    -   A record was found that did not have a field with the name specified by `id-field-name`
    -   A record was found where `id-field-name` did not refer to a value of type `string`

_Properties_

-   `data` - An array of key/value pairs where each item in the array represents one row of data. For more information about the `data` property, refer to the [data API spec](table-data-api.md).

> -   `validity` - Readonly object that represents the validity states that the table's configuration can be in.

Reviewer 2: Should we describe the high-level structure of this now or add more later? I'd at least initially advocate for a readonly object of boolean values and the object has type `TableValidityState` to mirror [ValidityState](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ValidityState)

Author: I wasn't sure what the right level of detail to put here was. I've updated it as you suggested.

> -   `validity` - Readonly object of boolean values that represents the validity states that the table's configuration can be in. The object's type is `TableValidityState` to mirror the [`ValidityState`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ValidityState) property.

Reviewer 2: nit: Mirror seemed to me that it would copy the exact properties

```suggestion
-   `validity` - Readonly object of boolean values that represents the validity states that the table's configuration can be in. The object's type is `TableValidityState`, analogous to the [`ValidityState`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ValidityState) property used for HTML 5 control validation.
```

### Open Issues

-   How do different invalid configurations on the table get reflected to the client & end user?
    -   Do all invalid configurations get treated the same way?

>     -   Should we render no rows, show some invalid text, stop updates to the table's state? Some things to keep in mind related to this:

Reviewer: In the `id-field-name` attribute section of the spec you mention that the table will render no rows when in an invalid state. Could you either delete this open question or clarify that is an initial approach which we plan to revisit when we get further into implementation?

Author: I've updated this bullet point to better reflect the open issue.
